5. HESTER AT HER NEEDLE
Hester Prynne's term of confinement was now at an end.
The prison door was thrown open, and she came forth into the sunshine, which, falling on
all alike, seemed to her sick and morbid heart, as if meant for no other purpose than to reveal
the scarlet letter on her breast.
Perhaps there was a more real torture in her first unattended footsteps from the threshold
of the prison than even in the procession and spectacle that had been described, where
she was made the common infamy at which all mankind was summoned to point its finger.
Then she was supported by an unnatural tension of the nerves, and by all the combative energy
of her character which enabled her to convert the scene into a kind of lurid triumph, it
was moreover a separate and insulated event, to occur but once in her lifetime, and to
meet which, therefore reckless of economy, she might call up the vital strength that
she would have sufficed for many quiet years.
The very law that condemned her, a giant of stern features but with vigor to support as
in his iron arm, had held her up through the terrible ordeal of her ignominy, but now, with
the unattended walk from her prison door, became the daily custom, that she must either
sustain and carry it forward by the ordinary resources of her nature or sink beneath it.
She could no longer borrow from the future to help her through the present grief.
Tomorrow would bring its own trial with it, so would the next day, so would the next,
each its own trial.
And yet, the very same that was now so unutterably grievous to be born, the days of the far-off
future would toil onward, still with the same burden for her to take up and bear along with
her, but never to fling down, for the accumulating days and added years would pile up their
misery upon the heap of shame.
Without them all, giving up her individuality, she would become the general symbol at which
the preacher and the moralist might point, and in which they might vivify and embody
their images of a woman's frailty and sinful passion.
Thus, the young and pure would be taught to look at her with the scarlet letter flaming
on her breast, at her, the child of the honorable parents, at her, the mother of the babe that
would hereafter be a woman, at her, who had once been innocent as the figure, the body,
the reality of sin.
And over her grave, the infamy at which she must carry thither would be her only monument.
It may seem marvelous that, with the world before her, kept by no restrictive clause
or her condemnation within the limits of the Puritan settlement, so remote and so obscure,
free to return to her birthplace or to any other European land, and there hide her character
and identity under a new exterior as completely as if emerging into another state of being,
and having also the passage of the dark, inscrutable forest open to her, where the
wildness of her nature might assimilate itself with the people's customs in life or alien
from the law that had condemned her.
It may seem marvelous that this woman should still call that place her home, where, and
where only, she must needs to be the type of shame.
But there is a fatality, a feeling so irresistible and inevitable, that it has the force of doom,
which almost invariably compels human beings to linger around and haunt, ghost-like, the spot
where some great and marked event has given the color to her lifetime, and still the more
irresistibly, the darker the tinge that saddens it. Her sin, her ignominy, were the roots which
she had struck into the soil. It was as if new birth, with stronger assimilations than the first,
had converted the forest land still so uncongenial to every other pilgrim and wanderer,
into Hester Prynne's wild and dreary but lifelong home. All other scenes of earth, even that village
of rural England, where happy infancy and stainless maidenhood seemed yet to be her
and her mother's keeping, like garments put off long ago, were foreign to her in comparison.
The chain that bound her here was made of iron links and galling in her inmost soul,
but could never be broken. It might be, too, doubtless it was so, although she hid the
secret from herself and grew pale whenever it struggled out of her heart, like a serpent
from its hole. It might be that another feeling kept her within the scene and pathway that had
been so fatal. There dwelt, there trod the feet of one with whom she deemed herself connected
in a union that, unrecognized on earth, would bring them together before the bar of final judgment,
and make that their marriage altar for a joint futurity of endless retribution.
Over and over again the tempester of souls had thrust this idea upon Hester's contemplation,
and laughed at the passionate and desperate joy at which she seized and then strove to cast it from
her. She barely looked the idea in the face and hastened to bar it from its dungeon. What she
compelled herself to believe, what, finally, she reasoned upon as her motive to continuing a
delusion. Here, she said to herself, had been the scene of her guilt, and here should be the
scene of her earthly punishment. And so, perchance, the torture of her daily shame would at length
purge her soul and work out another purity than that which she had lost, more saint-like because
the result of martyrdom. Hester Prynne, therefore, did not flee. On the outskirts of town, within the
peninsula, but not in close vicinity to any other habitation, there was a small thatched cottage.
It had been built by an earlier settler and abandoned because the soil about it was too
sterile for cultivation. While its comparative remoteness put it out of the sphere of social
activity which already marked the habits of the immigrants, it stood on the shore looking across
the basin of the sea at the forest-covered hills toward the west. A clump of scrubby trees such as
grew on the peninsula did not so much conceal the cottage from view, as seemed to denote that there
was some object which would fain have been, or at least ought to be, concealed. In this little
lonesome dwelling, with some slender means that she possessed, and by the license of the magistrates
who still kept an inquisitorial watch over her, Hester established herself with her infant child.
A mystic's shadow on the suspicion immediately attached itself to the spot.
Children, too young to comprehend wherefore this woman should be shut out from the sphere of human
charities, would creep nigh enough to behold her plying her needle at the cottage window,
or standing in the doorway, or laboring in her little garden, or coming forth along the pathway
that led townward, and discerning that scarlet letter on her breast would scamper off with a
strange, contagious fear. Loneliness was Hester's situation, and without a friend on earth who dared
to show himself, she, however, incurred even no risk of want. She possessed an art that sufficed
even in a land that afforded comparatively little scope for its exercise, to supply food for her
thriving infant and herself. It was the art, then as now, almost the only one within a woman's grasp,
of needlework. She bore on her breast, in the curiously embroidered letter, a specimen of her
delicate and imaginative skill, of which the dames of a court might gladly have availed themselves,
to add the richer and more spiritual adornment of human ingenuity to their fabrics of silk and gold.
Here, indeed, in the sable simplicity that generally characterized the puritanic modes of
dress, there might be an infrequent call for the finer productions of her handiwork.
Yet the taste of the age, demanding whatever was elaborate in compositions of this kind,
did not fail to extend its influence over our stern progenitors, who had cast behind them so
many fashions which it might seem harder to dispense with. Public ceremonies, such as the
ordinations, the installation of magistrates, and all that could give magistrate to the forms in
which a new government manifested itself to the people, were as a matter of policy marked by a
and well-conducted ceremonial ensemble, but yet a studied magnificence. Deep ruffs, painfully
wrought bands, and gorgeously embroidered gloves were all deemed necessary to the official state
of men, assuming the reins of power, and were readily allowed to individuals dignified by rank
or wealth, even while sumptuary laws forbade these and similar extravagances to the plebeian order.
In the array of funerals, too, whether for the apparel of the dead body, or to typify by manifold
emblematic devices of sable cloth and snowy lawn, the sorrow of the survivors, there was a frequent
and characteristic demand for such labor as Hester Primm could supply. Baby linen, for babies,
then wore robes of state, afforded still another possibility of toil and emolument.
By degrees, nor very slowly, her handiwork became what would now be termed the fashion.
Whether from commiseration for women of so miserable a destiny, or from the morbid curiosity that gives
a fictitious value even to common or worthless things, or by whatever other intangible circumstances
was then, as now sufficient to bestow on some persons what others might seek in vain, or,
because Hester really filled a gap which must otherwise have remained vacant, it is certain
that she had ready and fairly requited employment for many hours as she saw fit to occupy with her
needle. Vanity, it may be, chose to mortify itself by putting on for ceremonials of pomp and state
the garments that had been wrought by her sinful hands. Her needlework was seen on the ruff of the
governor, military men wore it on their scarves, and the minister on his band. It decked the baby's
little cap. It was shut up to be mild-wet and moldered away in the coffins of the dead.
But it is not recorded that, in a single instance, her skill was called in aid to
embroider the white veil which was to cover the pure blushes of a bride.
The exception indicated the ever-relentless vigor with which society frowned upon her sin.
Hester sought not to acquire anything beyond a substance, but the plainest and most ascetic
description for herself and a simple abundance for her child. Her own dress was of the coarsest
materials and the most somber hue, with only that of one ornament, the scarlet letter, which it was
her doom to wear. The child's attire, on the other hand, was distinguished by a fanciful,
or we might rather say a fantastic ingenuity, which served indeed to heighten the airy charm
that earlier began to develop itself in the little girl, but which appeared to also have
a deeper meaning. We may speak further of it hereafter. Except for the small expenditure
and decoration on her infant, Hester bestowed on her some hurtful means and charity on wretches
less miserable than herself, and who not unfrequently insulted the hand that fed them.
Much of the time which she might readily have applied to the better efforts of her art,
she employed in making coarse garments for the poor. It is probable that there was an idea of
penance in the mode of an occupation, and that she offered up a real sacrifice of enjoyment
in devoting so many hours to such rude handiwork. She added in her nature a rich, voluptuous,
oriental characteristic, a taste for the gorgeously beautiful, which save in the
exquisite productions of her needle, found nothing else in all the possibilities of her life to
exercise itself upon. Women derive a pleasure incomprehensible for the other sex from the
delicate toil of the needle. To Hester Prynne, it might have been a mode of expressing, and
therefore soothing, the passion of her life. Like all other joys, she rejected it as a sin.
This morbid meddling of conscience with an immaterial matter betoken, it is to be feared,
no genuine and steadfast penance, but something doubtful, something that might be deeply wrong
beneath. In this manner, Hester Prynne came to have a part to perform in the world. With her
native energy of character and rare capacity, it could not entirely cast her off, although it had
set a mark upon her more intolerable to a woman's heart than that which branded the brow of Cain.
In all her intercourse with society, however, there was nothing that made her feel as if she
belonged to it. Every gesture, every word, and even the silence of those with whom she came in
contact, inquired, and often expressed, that she was banished, and as much as alone as if she
inhabited another sphere, but communicated with the common nature by other organs and senses than
the rest of humankind. She stood apart from moral interests, yet close beside them, long a ghost
revisits the familiar fireside and can no longer make itself seen or felt, nor more smile with the
household joy, nor mourn with the kindred sorrow, or should it succeed in manifesting its forbidden
sympathy, awakening only terror and horrible repugnance. These emotions, in fact, and its
bitter scorn besides, seem to be the sole portion that she retained in the universal heart.
It was not an age of delicacy, and her position, although she understood it well and was in little
danger of forgetting it, was often brought before her vivid self-perception, like a new anguish,
by the rudest touch upon the tenderest spot. The poor, as we have already said, whom she sought out
to be the objects of her bounty, reviled the hand that was stretched forth to secure them.
Dames of elevated rank likewise, whose doors she entered in the way of her occupation,
were accustomed to distil drops of bitterness into her heart, sometimes through the alchemy
of quiet malice by which women can concoct a subtle poison from ordinary trifles, and sometimes
also by a coarser expression that fell upon the sufferer's defenseless breast like a rough blow
upon an ulcerated wound. Custer had schooled herself long and well. She never responded to
these attacks, save by a flush of crimson that rose irreflexibly over the pale cheek,
and again subsided into the depths of her bosom. She was patient, a martyr indeed, but she
forbear to pray for her enemies, lest, in spite of her forgiving aspirations, the words of the
blessing should stubbornly twist themselves into a curse. Continually, and in a thousand other ways,
did she feel the innumerable frauds of anguish that had been so cunningly contrived for her by
the undying, the ever-active sentence of the Puritan Tribunal. Clergymen paused in the street
to address words of exhortation that brought a crowd with its mingled grin and frown around the
poor, sinful woman. If she entered a church trusting to share the Sabbath smile of the
Universal Father, it was often her mishap to find herself the text of the discourse.
She grew to have a dread of children, for they had imbibed from their parents a vague idea of
something horrible in this dreary woman, gliding silently through the town, with never any companion
but only one child. Therefore, first allowing her to pass, they pursued her at a distance with
shrill cries and the utterance of a word that had no distinct report to their own minds, but was
nonetheless terrible to her, as proceeding from the lips that babbled it unconsciously.
It seemed to argue so wide a diffusion of her shame that all nature knew of it. It could have
caused her no deeper pain had the leaves of the trees whispered the dark story among themselves,
and the summer breeze murmured about it, had the wintry blast shrieked it aloud.
Another peculiar torture was felt in the gaze of the new eye. When strangers looked curiously at
the scarlet letter, and none ever failed to do so, they branded it afresh into Hester's soul,
so that oftentimes she could scarcely refrain, it always did refrain, from covering the symbol
with her hand. But then again an accustomed eye had likewise its own anguish to inflict.
At its cool stare the familiarity was intolerable. From first to last and short, Hester Prynne had
always this dreadful agony in feeling a human eye upon the token. The spot never grew callous,
it seemed, on the contrary, to grow more sensitive with daily torture. But sometimes,
once in many days or perchance in many months, she felt an eye, a human eye, upon the ignominious
brand that seemed to give a momentary relief as if half her agony were shared. The next instant,
back at all rushed again, with still a deeper throb of pain, for in that brief interval she
had sinned anew. Had Hester sinned alone? Her imagination was somehow affected, and, had she
been of softer moral and intellectual fibre, would have been still more so by the strange and solitary
anguish of her life. Walking to and fro with those lonely footsteps in the little world with
which she had outwardly connected, and now and then appeared to Hester, if altogether fancy,
it was nevertheless too impotent to be resisted. She felt, or fancied then, that the scarlet letter
had endowed her with a new sense. She shuddered to believe, yet could not help believing, that it
gave her a sympathetic knowledge of the hidden sin in our hearts. She was terror-stricken by
the revelations that were thus made. What were they? Could they be other than the insidious
whispers of the bad angel, who would fain have pursued the struggling woman, as yet only half
his victim? That the outward guise of purity was but a lie, and that, if truth were everywhere to
be shown, a scarlet letter would blaze forth on many a bosom besides Hester Prince? Or must
she receive those intimidations, so obscure, yet so distant, as truth? In all her miserable experience
there was nothing else so awful and so loathsome as this sense. Perplexed as well as shocked her
by the irreverent opportunities of the occasions that brought it into vivid action. Sometimes the
red infamy upon her breast would give a sympathetic thrive, if she passed near a venerable minister or
the model of piety and justice, to whom the age of antique reverence looked up as to a mortal man
in fellowship with angels. What evil thing is at hand, would Hester say to herself, lifting her
reluctant eyes, there would be nothing a human within the scope of view, save the form of the
earthly saint? Again, the mystic sisterhood would contumishly assert itself as she met the sanctified
crown of some matron, who, according to the rumor of all tongues, had kept cold snow within her bosom
throughout life. That unsung snow in the matron's bosom, in the burning Shema and Hester Prince,
would had the two in common, or once more the electric thrill would give her warning. Behold,
Hester here is a companion. And looking up, she would detect the eyes of a young maiden glancing
at the scarlet letter, shyly and aside, and quickly averted with a faint, chill crimson in
her cheeks, as if her purity were somewhat sullied by the momentary glance. O fiend,
whose talisman was of that fatal symbol, wouldst thou leave nothing, whether in youth or age,
for this poor sinner to revere? Such loss of faith is ever one of the saddest results of sin.
Be it accepted as proof that all was not corrupt in this poor victim of her own frailty,
and man's hard law, that Hester Prince yet struggled to believe that no fellow mortal
was guilty like herself. The vulgar, who in their dreary old times were always contributing a
grotesque horror to what interested their imaginations, had a story about the scarlet
letter, which we might readily work up into a terrific legend. They averred that the symbol
was not a mere scarlet cloth tinged in an earthly dye pot, but was the red hot with infernal fire,
and could be seen glowing all alight whenever Hester Prince walked abroad in the night time.
And we must need say it seared Hester's bosom so deeply, that perhaps there was more truth in that
rumor than our modern incredulity would be inclined to admit. End of chapter 5 of the scarlet letter.
you